Information Security: Privacy Issues

Privacy Issues Module 7

Privacy Privacy as an aspect of security; confidentiality Authentication effects on privacy Privacy and the Internet Privacy is a human right, although people can legitimately disagree over when or to what extent privacy is deserved . Information privacy has three aspects: sensitive data, affected parties, and controlled disclosure

Aspects of Information Privacy Controlled Disclosure : You voluntarily choose who can know which things about you. People may ask you for your telephone number: your auto mechanic, a shop clerk, your tax authority, a new business contact, or a new friend. In each case, you consider why the person wants the number and then decide whether to give it out. But the key point is that you decide. In giving out your number, you are transferring or ceding authority and control to someone or something else. You may say "don't give my number to anyone else," "use discretion," or "I am sensitive about my privacy," but you do not control the other person or system.

Aspects of Information Privacy Sensitive Data: Someone asks you for your shoe size. You might answer, "I'm a very private person and cannot imagine why you would want to know such an intimate detail" or you could say "10"; some people find that data item more sensitive than others.

Identity: name, identifying information, the ownership of private data Finances: credit rating and status, bank details, outstanding loans, payment records, tax information Legal: criminal records, marriage history, civil suits Health: medical conditions, drug use, DNA Opinions, preferences, and membership: voting records, expressed opinions, membership in advocacy organizations, religion, political party, sexual preference, reading habits, web browsing, close friends

Documentary evidence: surface mail, diaries, poems, correspondence, recorded thoughts Privileged communications: with professionals such as lawyers, accountants, doctors Academic and employment information: school records, employment ratings Location data: general travel plans, current location, travel patterns Digital footprint: email, telephone calls, spam, instant messages, tweets, social networking history. Biometrics: physical characteristics, polygraph results, fingerprints

Aspects of Information Privacy Affected Subject Individuals, groups, companies, organizations, and governments all have data they consider sensitive. We use terms such as "subject" and "owner" to distinguish between the person or entity. For private enterprise, privacy usually relates to gaining and maintaining an edge over the competition. Other organizations, such as schools, hospitals, or charities, may need to protect personal data about their students, patients, or donors. Many organizations protect information related to their reputation, too. Privacy and confidentiality relate in that confidentiality is a means of protecting what one person considers private.

Computer-Related Privacy Problems
Information collection: Data are collected only with knowledge and explicit consent. Information usage: Data are used only for certain specified purposes. Information retention: Data are retained for only a set period of time. Information disclosure: Data are disclosed to only an authorized set of people. Information security: Appropriate mechanisms are used to ensure the protection of the data. Access control: All modes of access to all forms of collected data are controlled. Monitoring: Logs are maintained showing all accesses to data. Policy changes: Less restrictive policies are never applied after-the-fact to already obtained data.

Computer-Related Privacy Problems Notice and Consent: Telephone companies record the date, time, duration, source, and destination of each telephone call. ISPs track sites visited. Some sites keep the IP address of each visitor to the site (although IP address is usually not unique to a specific individual). The user is not necessarily aware of this third category of data collection and thus cannot be said to have given informed consent to the collection. In addition to notification, consent is sometimes required. That is, you are explicitly asked for permission to collect and use information. For example, a mapping program or app may ask your permission to automatically collect your location; if you refuse, either you cannot proceed with using the program, or you must enter your location each time you want a map or set of directions.

Computer-Related Privacy Problems Control and Ownership of Data: Your browsing habits, purchase practices, and preferences for hotel brand, type of hotel room, airline or travel agent could be sold to other hotels. You have little control over dissemination (or redissemination) of your data. And once the data are gone, you cannot get them back. As for the electronic communication, you can delete your posting. However, in the time between creation and deletion, several other people might have seen your original posting (or a cached version) and copied it to blogs or other websites you do not control. Someone else has posted something on the web that is personal about you, and you want it removed. Even if the poster agrees, you may not be able to remove all its traces

Privacy Principles and Policies Fair Information Practices: Collection limitation. Data should be obtained lawfully and fairly. Data quality. Data should be relevant to their purposes, accurate, complete, and up to date. Purpose specification. The purposes for which data will be used should be identified and the data destroyed if no longer necessary Use limitation. Use for purposes other than those specified is authorized only with consent of the data subject or by authority of law. Security safeguards. Procedures to guard against loss, corruption, destruction, or misuse of data should be established. Openness. It should be possible to acquire information about the collection, storage, and use of personal data systems. Individual participation. The data subjects normally have a right to access and to challenge data relating to them. Accountability. A data controller should be designated and accountable for complying with the measures to effect the principles.

Privacy Principles and Policies U.S. Privacy Laws Consumer credit is addressed in the Fair Credit Reporting Act Healthcare information in the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Financial service organizations in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), Children's web access in the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA), Student records in the Federal Educational Rights and Privacy Act. Not surprisingly, these separate laws are inconsistent in protecting privacy.

Privacy Principles and Policies U.S. Privacy Laws A problem with many laws is that the target areas of the laws still overlap: Which law (if any) would require privacy protection of a university student's health center bills paid by credit card? Is it the healthcare law, the credit reporting law, educational privacy law, or something else? Would it matter if the university were public or private? The laws can have different protection and handling requirements, so it is important to determine which law applies to a single piece of data

Privacy Principles and Policies U.S. Privacy Laws As an example, the primary purpose of HIPAA was to ensure that people who left or were terminated from one job had health insurance to cover them until they got another job; the privacy aspects were far less prominent as the law was being developed.

Privacy Principles and Policies Controls on U.S. Government Websites : The FTC determined that, in order to obey the Privacy Act, government websites would have to address five privacy factors: Notice. Data collectors must disclose their information practices before collecting personal information from consumers. Choice. Consumers must be given a choice as to whether and how personal information collected from them may be used. Access. Consumers should be able to view and contest the accuracy and completeness of data collected about them. Security. Data collectors must take reasonable steps to assure that information collected from consumers is accurate and secure from unauthorized use. Enforcement. A reliable mechanism must be in place to impose sanctions for noncompliance with these fair information practices.

Privacy Principles and Policies Controls on U.S. Government Websites : In 2002, the U.S. Congress enacted the e-Government Act of 2002 requiring federal government agencies to post privacy policies on their websites. Those policies must disclose the information that is to be collected the reason the information is being collected the intended use by the agency of the information the entities with whom the information will be shared the notice or opportunities for consent that would be provided to individuals the way in which the information will be secured the rights of the individual under the Privacy Act and other laws relevant to the protection of the privacy of an individual.

Privacy Principles and Policies Non-U.S. Privacy Principles: Directive 95/46/EC, often called the European Privacy Directive, requires that rights of privacy of individuals be maintained and that data about them be processed fairly and lawfully. collected for specified, explicit, and legitimate purposes and not further processed in a way incompatible with those purposes. adequate, relevant, and not excessive in relation to the purposes for which they are collected or further processed. accurate and, where necessary, kept up to date. kept in a form that permits identification of data subjects for no longer than is necessary for the purposes.

Privacy Principles and Policies Privacy in Other Countries : Other countries, such as Japan, Australia, and Canada, have also passed laws protecting the privacy of personal data about individuals. Different laws in different jurisdictions will inevitably clash. Relations between the European Union and the United States have been strained over privacy because the E.U. law forbids sharing data with companies or governments in countries whose privacy laws are not as strong as those of the E.U. The United States and the European Union have agreed to a set of "safe harbor" principles that let U.S. companies trade with European countries in spite of their not meeting all European privacy laws.

Individual Actions to Protect Privacy Anonymity Sometimes people may want to do things anonymously. For example, a rock star buying a beach house might want to avoid unwanted attention from neighbors, or someone posting to a dating list might want to view replies before making a date. Multiple Identities - Linked or Not To your bank, you are your account number. To your motor vehicles bureau, you are your driver's license number. And to your credit card company, you are your credit card number Linking identities correctly to create dossiers and break anonymity creates privacy risks but linking them incorrectly creates much more serious risks for the use of the data and the privacy of affected people.

Individual Actions to Protect Privacy Pseudonymity Sometimes, we don't want full anonymity. Multiple identities can also be convenient; for example, you may have a professional email account and a social one. Similarly, disposable identities (that you use for a while and then stop using) can be convenient. The Swiss bank account provides a classic example of pseudonymity. Each customer has only a number to identify and access the account, and only a few selected bank employees are allowed to know your identity; all other employees see only your account number. On account statements, no name appears: Only the account number or a pseudonym is printed.

Government and Privacy Governments gather and store data on citizens, residents, and visitors. The government is an enabler or regulator of privacy as well as a user of private data

Authentication Government plays a complex role in personal authentication. Driving License, Passport, etc., Government obtains data based on those materials from others - the government may buy credit report information from private companies to help with screening airline passenger lists for terrorists Always a potential for the government to misuse data and violate privacy rights

Government and Privacy Data Access Risks: Recognizing these risks in government access to personal data, the U.S. Secretary of Defense appointed a committee to investigate and document the nature of risks in such data collection. data error: ranges from transcription errors to incorrect analysis inaccurate linking: two or more data items are correct but are incorrectly linked by a presumed common element difference of form and content: precision, accuracy, format, and semantic errors purposely wrong: collected from a source that intentionally provides incorrect data, such as a forged identity card or a false address given to mislead.

Government and Privacy false accusation: an incorrect or out-of-date conclusion that the government has no data to verify or reject. mission creep: data acquired for one purpose that leads to a broader use because the data will support that mission. poorly protected: data of questionable integrity because of the way they have been managed and handled.

Government and Privacy Steps to Protect Against Privacy Loss : Data minimization. Obtain the least data necessary for the task Data anonymization. Where possible, replace identifying information with untraceable codes Auditing. Record who has accessed data and when, both to help identify responsible parties in the event of a breach Security and controlled access. Adequately protect and control access to sensitive data Training. Ensure that people accessing data understand what to protect and how to do Quality. Take into account the purpose for which data were collected, how they were stored, their age Restricted usage. As distinct from controlling access, review all proposed uses of the data Data left in place. If possible, leave data with the original owner or collector. Policy. Establish a clear policy for data privacy.

Identity Theft Unauthorized opening of an account in someone else's name Changing account information to enable the thief to take over Use someone else's account or service Perpetration of fraud by obtaining identity documents in the stolen name Identity theft become apparent a month or two after the data are stolen, when fraudulent bills or transactions start coming or appearing in the victim's files. By that time, the thief has likely made a profit and has dropped the stolen identity, moving on to a new victim. A thief who gets one key, such as a national identity number, can use that to get a second, and those two to get a third. Each key gives access to more data and resources

Application of Cryptographic Techniques for Privacy Preservation Purpose & Importance Secure sensitive data from unauthorized access, cyber threats, and breaches. Ensure confidentiality, integrity, and authentication of information. Vital in cloud computing, online transactions, healthcare, and digital communications. Support compliance with GDPR, HIPAA, and other privacy regulations.

Application of Cryptographic Techniques for Privacy Preservation Encryption - Converts plaintext into unreadable ciphertext to protect data confidentiality. Symmetric Encryption (e.g., AES) Uses a single key for both encryption and decryption. Applied in data storage, VPNs, and secure messaging. Asymmetric Encryption (e.g., RSA, ECC) Uses a public and private key pair. Solves key distribution challenges. Used in SSL/TLS, secure emails, and blockchain transactions. Both ensure data confidentiality and protection against interception.

Application of Cryptographic Techniques for Privacy Preservation Homomorphic Encryption (HE) Enables computations on encrypted data without decryption. Supports secure cloud computing and privacy-preserving AI models. Allows data analysis while keeping information confidential. Limitation: High computational cost; ongoing research aims to improve efficiency.

Application of Cryptographic Techniques for Privacy Preservation Zero-Knowledge Proofs (ZKP) Allow authentication without revealing sensitive data. Common in blockchain, digital identity verification, and anonymous cryptocurrency transactions. Example: zk-SNARKs (Zero-Knowledge Succinct Non-Interactive Argument of Knowledge) Let users prove knowledge of information without disclosing it. Used in privacy-focused systems like Zcash.

Application of Cryptographic Techniques for Privacy Preservation Hashing Ensures data integrity through one-way transformations. Generates fixed-length, irreversible hashes of input data. Examples: SHA-256 - Used in blockchain security. bcrypt - Used for secure password storage. Supports digital signatures, HMAC, and data tamper detection.