Information Security: Data Loss Prevention (DLP)

Data Loss Prevention What is DLP and How Does it Work?
Data loss prevention (DLP) is an approach that seeks to improve information security and protect business information from data breaches. It prevents end-users from moving key information outside the network. DLP also refers to tools that enable a network administrator to monitor data accessed and shared by end users. What is DLP and How Does it Work? Other features common in DLP solutions include: - Monitoring,tools provide visibility into data and system access. - Filtering,tools can filter data streams to restrict suspicious or unidentified activity. - Reporting,tools provide logging and reports helpful for incident response and auditing. - Analysis,tools can identify vulnerabilities and suspicious behavior and provide forensic context to security teams. What is DLP and How Does it Work? DLP solutions can be helpful in a variety of use cases, including: - Security policy enforcement,DLP tools can help you identify deviations from policy making it easier to correct misconfigurations. - Meeting compliance standards,DLP tools can compare current configurations to compliance standards and provide proof of measures taken. - Increasing data visibility,DLP tools can provide visibility across systems, helping you ensure that data is secure no matter where it's stored. Reasons for Implementing a Data Loss Prevention Policy. Compliance - Businesses are subject to mandatory compliance standards imposed by governments (such as HIPAA, SOX, PCIDSS). These standards often stipulate how businesses should secure Personally Identifiable Information (PII), and other sensitive data. - A DLP policy is a basic first step to compliance, and most DLP tools are built to address the requirements of common standards. Reasons for Implementing a Data Loss Prevention Policy. Intellectual property and intangible assets - An organization may have trade secrets, other strategic proprietary information, or intangible assets such as customer lists, business strategies, and so on. - Loss of this type of information can be extremely damaging, and accordingly, it is directly targeted by attackers and malicious insiders. - A DLP policy can help identify and safeguard critical information assets. Reasons for Implementing a Data Loss Prevention Policy. Data visibility - Implementing a DLP policy can provide insight into how stakeholders use data.

- In order to protect sensitive information, organizations must first know it exists, where it exists, who uses it and for what purposes. Creating a Successful DLP Policy
Classifying and interpreting data - Identify which information needs to be protected, by evaluating risk factors and how vulnerable it is. Invest in classifying and interpreting data, because this is the basis for implementing a suitable data protection policy. Allocate roles - clearly define the role of each individual involved in the data loss prevention strategy. Begin by securing the most sensitive data - start by selecting a specific kind of information to protect, which represents the biggest risk to the business. Automate as much as possible - the more DLP processes are automated, the broader you'll be able to deploy them in the organization. Manual DLP processes are inherently limited in its scope and the amount of data they can cover. Creating a Successful DLP Policy. Use anomaly detection - some modern DLP tools use machine learning and behavioral analytics, instead of simple statistical analysis and correlation rules, to identify abnormal user behavior. Each user and group of users is modeled with a behavioral baseline, allowing accurate detection of data actions that might represent malicious intent. Involve leaders in the organization - management is key to making DLP work, because policies are worthless if they cannot be enforced at the organizational level. Educate stakeholder - putting a DLP policy in place is not enough. Invest in making stakeholders and users of data aware of the policy, its significance and what they need to do to safeguard organizational data. Creating a Successful DLP Policy. Documenting DLP strategy - documenting the DLP policy is required by many compliance standards. It also provides clarity, both at the individual and organizational level, as to what is required and how the policy is enforced. Establish metrics - measure DLP effectiveness using metrics like percentage of false positives, number of incidents and Mean Time to Response. Don't save unnecessary data - a business should only use, save and store information that is essential. If information is not needed, remove it; data that was never stored cannot go missing. What Type of DLP Solution is Right for Your Organization? Network DLP - Protects an organization's network processes, such as web application, email and FTP. - Lives in the company's network, and monitors data as it moves throughout the network. - Maintains a database which provides details as to which data is being used and who is using the data. - Provides visibility into all data in transit on their network. What Type of DLP Solution is Right for Your Organization? Storage DLP - Provides information about files stored and shared by users of an organization's network. - Enables viewing sensitive files shared and stored on the network. - Provides visibility into information stored via on- premise storage equipment and cloud-based storage. What Type of DLP Solution is Right for Your Organization? Endpoint DLP - Monitors workstations, servers, and mobile devices such as laptops, mobile phones, external hard-drives and USB disks. - Installed as an agent on endpoint equipment and prevents data leakage from the endpoints. - Provides visibility into data stored on endpoints physically located inside and outside the organization. Top Data Loss Prevention Tools List for 2025. Microsoft Purview - Cloud DLP. Google Cloud DLP. Netskope DLP. Symantec DLP (Broadcom) - Network and Endpoint DLP. Forcepoint DLP - Monitor users. Digital Guardian - All in one Open Source DLP. OpenDLP - Sensitive data protection. MyDLP - Small org, email, endpoint, NW. Sensitive Data Discovery - map and manage sensitive data Intrusion Detection System (IDS) Intrusion Detection system.

Intrusion Behavior Protected Data detection Structure After an Analysis System source Approach Attack

System state Anomaly SignatureCentralised Network Distributed On-the-fly Internal Hids Nids trail Audit Passive IDS HybridsActive IDSAnalysis(kernel, detection system system processing based IDS Detection Packets Services, files)

Agent System Intrusion Detection System (IDS) Network intrusion prevention (IP)
It includes the process of detecting network intrusion events but also includes the process of preventing and blocking detected or potential network incidents. Network intrusion detection and prevention systems (idp). They are based on identifying potential incidents, logging information about them, attempting to prevent them and alerting the administrators responsible for security. In addition to this basic function, IDP systems can also be used to identify problems concerning the adopted security policies, to document existing security threats and to discourage individuals from violating security rules. IDP systems use various incident detection methods. Intrusion Detection System (IDS). IDP (intrusion detection and prevention) network intrusion detection (ID) is based on monitoring the operation of computer systems or `networks and analyzing the processes they perform, which can point to certain incidents. Incidents are events posing a threat to or violating defined security policies, violating AUP (acceptable use policy) rules, or generally accepted security norms. They appear as a result of the operation of various malware programs (e.g., Worms, spyware, viruses, and Trojans), as a result of attempts at unauthorized access to a system through public infrastructure (internet), or as a result of the operation of authorized system users who abuse their privileges. Intrusion Detection System (IDS). There are three primary classes of detection methodology: - 1. Signature-based detection - 2. Anomaly-based detection - 3. Detection based on stateful protocol analysis Intrusion Detection System (IDS). Signature-based detection - certain security threats can be detected based on the characteristic manner in which they appear. - The behaviour of an already detected security threat, described in a form that can be used for the detection of any subsequent appearance of the same threat, is called an attack signature. - This detection method, based on the characteristic signature of an attack, is a process of comparing the known forms in which the threat has appeared with the specific network traffic in order to identify certain incidents. Intrusion Detection System (IDS). Signature-based detection - Although it can be very efficient in detecting the subsequent appearance of known threats, this detection method is extremely inefficient in the detection of completely unknown threats, of threats hidden by using various techniques, and of already known threats that have somehow been modified in the meantime. - It is considered the simplest detection method, and it cannot be used for monitoring and analyzing the state of certain, more complex forms of communication. Intrusion Detection System (IDS). Anomaly-based detection - This method of IDP is based on detecting anomalies in a specific traffic flow in the network. - Anomaly detection is performed, based on the defined profile of acceptable traffic and its comparison with the specific traffic in the network. - Acceptable traffic profiles are formed by tracking the typical characteristics of the traffic in the network during a certain period of time (e.g., The number of email messages sent by a user, and the number of attempts to log in to a host, or the level of utilisation of the processor in a given time interval). - These characteristics of the behaviour of users, hosts, connections or applications in the same time interval are then considered to be completely acceptable. Intrusion Detection System (IDS). Anomaly-based detection - However, acceptable-behaviour profiles can unintentionally contain certain security threats, which lead to problems in their application. - Likewise, imprecisely defined profiles of acceptable behaviour can cause numerous alarms, generated by the system itself as a reaction to certain acceptable activities on the network. - The greatest advantage of this detection method is its exceptional efficiency in detecting previously unknown security threats. Intrusion Detection System (IDS). Detection based on stateful protocol analysis - Stateful protocol analysis is a process of comparing predefined operation profiles with the specific data flow of that protocol on the network. - Predefined profiles of operation of a protocol are defined by the manufacturers of IDP devices and they identify everything that is acceptable or not acceptable in the exchange of messages in a protocol. - Unlike anomaly-based detection, where profiles are created based on the hosts or specific activities on the network, stateful protocol analysis uses general profiles generated by the equipment manufacturers. - Most IDP systems use several detection methods simultaneously, thus enabling a more comprehensive and precise method of detection. Intrusion Detection System (IDS). Detection based on stateful protocol analysis - Testing tools are used for testing the detection, recognition and response capabilities of devices that perform packet filtering (including those that use network address translation), such as firewalls, idses/ipses, routers and switches. - These test the traffic filtering devices' ability to detect and/or block dos attacks, spyware, backdoors, and attacks against applications such as IIS, SQL server and WINS. - Standard traffic sessions can be used to test how packet filtering devices handle a variety of protocols including HTTP, FTP, SNMP and SMTP Intrusion Detection System (IDS). Intrusion detection systems can be grouped into the following categories: - Host-based IDS - Network-based IDS - Intrusion prevention system (IPS) Host-based intrusion detection systems. Host-based IDSs are designed to monitor, detect and respond to activity and attacks on a given host. In most cases, attackers target specific systems on corporate networks that have confidential information. They will often try to install scanning programs and exploit other vulnerabilities that can record user activity on a particular host. Some host-based IDS tools provide policy management, statistical analytics and data forensics at the host level. Host-based intrusion detection systems. Host-based IDSs are best used when an intruder tries to access particular files or other services that reside on the host computer. Because attackers mainly focus on operating system vulnerabilities to break into hosts, in most cases, the host-based IDS is integrated into the operating systems that the host is running. Network-based intrusion detection systems. Network traffic based IDSs capture network traffic to detect intruders. Most often, these systems work as packet sniffers that read through incoming traffic and use specific metrics to assess whether a network has been compromised. Various internet and other proprietary protocols that handle messages between external and internal networks, such as TCP/IP, NetBEUI and XNS, are vulnerable to attack and require additional ways to detect malicious events. Frequently, intrusion detection systems have difficulty working with encrypted information and traffic from virtual private networks. Speed over 1Gbps is also a constraining factor, although modern and costly network-based IDSs have the capability to work fast over this speed. Network-based intrusion detection systems. Cooperative agents are one of the most important components of distributed intrusion detection architecture. An agent is an autonomous or semi-autonomous piece of software that runs in the background and performs useful tasks for another. Relative to IDSs, an agent is generally a piece of software that senses intrusions locally and reports attack information to central analysis servers. The cooperative agents can form a network among themselves for data transmission and processing. The use of multiple agents across a network allows a broader view of the network than might be possible with a single IDS or centralized IDSs. Intrusion prevention system (IPS). An IPS is a network security tool that can not only detect intruders but also prevent them from successfully launching any known attack. Intrusion prevention systems combine the abilities of firewalls and intrusion detection systems. However, implementing an IPS on an effective scale can be costly, so businesses should carefully assess their IT risks before making the investment. Moreover, some intrusion prevention systems are not as fast and robust as some firewalls and intrusion detection systems, so an IPS might not be an appropriate solution when speed is an absolute requirement. Intrusion prevention system (IPS). One important distinction to make is the difference between intrusion prevention and active response. An active response device dynamically reconfigures or alters network or system access controls, session streams or individual packets based on triggers from packet inspection and other detection devices. Active response happens after the event has occurred; thus, a single packet attack will be successful on the first attempt but will be blocked in future attempts; for example, a DDoS attack will be successful on the first packets but will be blocked afterwards. While active response devices are beneficial, this one aspect makes them unsuitable as an overall solution. Network intrusion prevention devices, on the other hand, are typically inline devices on the network that inspect packets and make decisions before forwarding them on to the destination. Intrusion prevention system (IPS). Most important, an IPS must perform packet inspection and analysis at wire speed. Intrusion prevention systems should be performing detailed packet inspection to detect intrusions, including application- layer and zero-day attacks. System or host intrusion prevention devices are also inline at the operating system level. They have the ability to intercept system calls, file access, memory access, processes and other system functions to prevent attacks. There are several intrusion prevention technologies, including the following: - System memory and process protection - Inline network devices - Session sniping - Gateway interaction devices Intrusion prevention system (IPS). System memory and process protection - This type of intrusion prevention strategy resides at the system level. - Memory protection consists of a mechanism to prevent a process from corrupting the memory of another process running on the same system. - Process protection consists of a mechanism for monitoring process execution, with the ability to kill processes that are suspected of being attacks. Intrusion prevention system (IPS). System memory and process protection - Internet technology, with its open architecture, inherently provides access to all resources that are connected to the world wide web. Hence, users can connect themselves to all legitimate and illegitimate web sources. - This may expose organizations to serious security threats. The outward and inward connections, thus, have a potential to jeopardize the security posture of an organization. These connections also create possibilities of data leakage from an organization to the outside world. Security threats have been increasingly exploiting these connections, channels, protocols and traffic to perpetrate attacks. Intrusion prevention system (IPS). Inline network devices - This type of intrusion prevention strategy places a network device directly in the path of network communications with the capability to modify and block attack packets as they traverse the device's interfaces. - It acts much like a router or firewall combined with the signature-matching capabilities of IDS. The detection and response happens in real time before the packet is passed on to the destination network. Intrusion prevention system (IPS). Session sniping - This type of intrusion prevention strategy terminates a TCP session by sending a TCP RST packet to both ends of the connection. When an attempted attack is detected, the TCP RST is sent and the attempted exploit is flushed from the buffers and thus prevented. Note that the TCP RST packets must have the correct sequence and acknowledgement numbers to be effective. Gateway interaction devices - This type of intrusion prevention strategy allows a detection device to dynamically interact with network gateway devices such as routers or firewalls. When an attempted attack is detected, the detection device can direct the router or firewall to block the attack. Intrusion prevention system (IPS). Session sniping system identification is another concern when deploying active response IPSs. When systems terminate sessions with RST packets, an attacker might be able to discover not only that an IPS is involved but also the type of underlying system. Readily available passive operating system identification tools analyze packets to determine the underlying operating system. This type of information might enable an attacker to evade the IPS or direct an attack at the IPS. Intrusion prevention system (IPS). There are several risks when deploying intrusion prevention technologies. Most notable is the recurring issue of false positives in today's intrusion detection systems. On some occasions, legitimate traffic will display characteristics similar to malicious traffic. This could be anything from inadvertently matching signatures to uncharacteristically high traffic volume. Even a finely tuned IDS can present false positives when this occurs. When intrusion prevention is involved, false positives can create a denial-of-service (DoS) condition for legitimate traffic. In addition, attackers who discover or suspect the use of intrusion prevention methods can purposely create a DoS attack against legitimate networks and sources by sending attacks with spoofed source IP addresses. A simple mitigation to some DoS conditions is to use a whitelisting policy. Intrusion prevention system (IPS). Another risk with active response IPSs involves gateway interaction timing and race conditions. In this scenario, a detection device directs a router or firewall to block the attempted attack. However, because of network latency, the attack has already passed the gateway device before it receives this direction from the detection device. A similar situation could occur with a scenario that creates a race condition on the gateway device itself between the attack and the response. In either case, the attack has a high chance of succeeding. Intrusion prevention system (IPS). When deploying an IPS, you should carefully monitor and tune your systems and be aware of the risks involved. You should also have an in-depth understanding of your network, its traffic, and both its normal and abnormal characteristics. It is always recommended to run IPS and active response technologies in test mode for a while to thoroughly understand their behavior.