Information Security: Configuring Firewalls

Configuring Firewall What firewall software does? - A firewall is simply a program or hardware device that filters the information coming through the internet connection into your private network or computer system. - If an incoming packet of information is flagged by the filters, it is not allowed through. Configuring Firewall. What firewall software does? - Let's say that you work at a company with 500 employees. The company will therefore have hundreds of computers that all have network cards connecting them together. In addition, the company will have one or more connections to the internet through something like T1 or T3 lines. - Without a firewall in place, all of those hundreds of computers are directly accessible to anyone on the internet. A person who knows what he or she is doing can probe those computers, try to make FTP connections to them, try to make telnet connections to them and so on. If one employee makes a mistake and leaves a security hole, hackers can get to the machine and exploit the hole. Configuring Firewall. What firewall software does? With a firewall in place, the landscape is much different. A company will place a firewall at every connection to the internet (for example, at every T1 line coming into the company). The firewall can implement security rules. For example, one of the security rules inside the company might be: Out of the 500 computers inside this company, only one of them is permitted to receive public FTP traffic. Allow ftp connections only to that one computer and prevent them on all others. Configuring Firewall. Firewalls use one or more of three methods to control traffic flowing in and out of the network: Packet filtering Proxy service Stateful inspection Configuring Firewall. Packet Filtering - Packets (small chunks of data) are analyzed against a set of filters. Packets that make it through the filters are sent to the requesting system and all others are discarded. Configuring Firewall. Proxy service Information from the internet is retrieved by the firewall and then sent to the requestingsystem and vice versa. Configuring Firewall. Stateful Inspection A newer method that doesn't examine the contents of each packet but instead compares certain key parts of the packet to a database of trusted information. Information traveling from inside the firewall to the outside is monitored for specific defining characteristics, then incoming information is compared to these characteristics. If the comparison yields a reasonable match, the information is allowed through. Otherwise it is discarded. Working of firewall Firewall SOFTWARE CONFIGURATION.

Firewalls are customizable. This means that you can add or remove filters based on several conditions. Some of these are: IP addresses Domain names Protocols Firewall SOFTWARE CONFIGURATION. IP addresses Each machine on the Internet is assigned a unique address called an IP address. For example, if a certain IP address outside the company is reading too many files from a server, the firewall can block all traffic to or from that IP address. Firewall SOFTWARE CONFIGURATION. A company might block all access to certain domain names, or allow access only to specific domain names. Firewall SOFTWARE CONFIGURATION. Protocols The protocol is the pre-defined way that someone who wants to use a service talks with that service. The "someone" could be a person, but more often it is a computer program like a Web browser. Protocols are often text, and simply describe how the client and server will have their conversation. The http in the Web's protocol. A company might set up only one or two machines to handle a specific protocol and ban that protocol on all other machines. Firewall SOFTWARE CONFIGURATION. Protocols - Some common protocols that you can set firewall filters for include: IP (Internet Protocol) TCP (Transmission Control Protocol) HTTP (Hyper Text Transfer Protocol) FTP (File Transfer Protocol) UDP (User Datagram Protocol) teletype network ICMP (Internet Control Message Protocol) SMTP (Simple Mail Transport Protocol) SNMP (Simple Network Management Protocol) Telnet (Teletype Network) Why Firewall Security? Access or abuse of unprotected computers - There are many creative ways that unscrupulous people use to access or abuse unprotected computers: Remote login Application backdoors SMTP session hijacking Operating system bugs Denial of service E-mail bombs Macros Viruses Spam Redirect bombs Source routing Why Firewall Security? Remote Login When someone is able to connect to your computer and control it in some form. This can range from being able to view or access your files to actually running programs on your computer. Why Firewall Security? Application backdoors Some programs have special features that allow for remote access. Others contain bugs that provide a backdoor, or hidden access that provides some level of control of the program. Why Firewall Security? SMTP session hijacking SMTP is the most common method of sending e- mail over the Internet. By gaining access to a list of e-mail addresses, a person can send unsolicited junk e-mail (spam) to thousands of users. This is done quite often by redirecting the e-mail through the SMTP server of an unsuspecting host, making the actual sender of the spam difficult to trace. Why Firewall Security? Operating system bugs Like applications, some operating systems have backdoors. Others provide remote access with insufficient security controls or have bugs that an experienced hacker can take advantage of. Why Firewall Security? Denial of service You have probably heard this phrase used in news reports on the attacks on major Web sites. This type of attack is nearly impossible to counter. What happens is that the hacker sends a request to the server to connect to it. When the server responds with an acknowledgement and tries to establish a session, it cannot find the system that made the request. By inundating a server with these unanswerable session requests, a hacker causes the server to slow to a crawl or eventually crash. Why Firewall Security? E-mail bombs An e-mail bomb is usually a personal attack. Someone sends you the same e-mail hundreds or thousands of times until your e-mail system cannot accept any more messages. Why Firewall Security? Macros To simplify complicated procedures, many applications allow you to create a script of commands that the application can run. This script is known as a macro. Hackers have taken advantage of this to create their own macros that, depending on the application, can destroy your data or crash your computer. Why Firewall Security? Viruses Probably the most well-known threat is computer viruses. A virus is a small program that can copy itself to other computers. This way it can spread quickly from one system to the next. Viruses range from harmless messages to erasing all of your data. Why Firewall Security? Spam Typically, harmless but always annoying, spam is the electronic equivalent of junk mail. Spam can be dangerous though. Quite often it contains links to Web sites. Be careful of clicking on these because you may accidentally accept a cookie that provides a backdoor to your computer. Why Firewall Security? Redirect bombs Hackers can use ICMP to change (redirect) the path information takes by sending it to a different router. This is one of the ways that a denial of service attack is set up. Why Firewall Security? Source routing In most cases, the path a packet travels over the Internet (or any other network) is determined by the routers along that path. But the source providing the packet can arbitrarily specify the route that the packet should travel. Hackers sometimes take advantage of this to make information appear to come from a trusted source or even from inside the network! Most firewall products disable source routing by default. Why Firewall Security? Security against unauthorized access or abuse Some of the items in the list above are hard, if not impossible, to filter using a firewall. While some firewalls offer virus protection, it is worth the investment to install anti-virus software on each computer. The level of security you establish will determine how many of these threats can be stopped by your firewall. You can also restrict traffic that travels through the firewall so that only certain types of information, such as e-mail, can get through. This is a good rule for businesses that have an experienced network administrator that understands what the needs are and knows exactly what traffic to allow through. One of the best things about a firewall from a security standpoint is that it stops anyone on the outside from logging onto a computer in your private network. Proxy Servers and DMZ. There are times that you may want remote users to have access to items on your network. Some examples are: Web site Online business FTP download and upload area Proxy Servers and DMZ DMZ is just an area that is outside the firewall. Think of DMZ as the front yard of a house. It belongs to the owner, who may put some things there, but would put anything valuable inside the house where it can be properly secured. Setting up a DMZ is very easy. If you have multiple computers, you can choose to simply place one of the computers between the Internet connection and the firewall. Most of the software firewalls available will allow you to designate a directory on the gateway computer as a DMZ. Configuring a Simple Firewall The Cisco 1800 integrated services routers support network traffic filtering by means of access lists. The router also supports packet inspection and dynamic temporary access lists by means of Context- Based Access Control (CBAC). Basic traffic filtering is limited to configured access list implementations that examine packets at the network layer or, at most, the transport layer, permitting or denying the passage of each packet through the firewall. However, the use of inspection rules in CBAC allows the creation and use of dynamic temporary access lists. Configuring a Simple Firewall These dynamic lists allow temporary openings in the configured access lists at firewall interfaces. These openings are created when traffic for a specified user session exits the internal network through the firewall. The openings allow returning traffic for the specified session (that would normally be blocked) back through the firewall. See the Cisco IOS Security Configuration Guide, Release 12.3, for more detailed information on traffic filtering and firewalls. The following Figure shows a network deployment using PPPoE or PPPoA with NAT and a firewall. Configuring a Simple Firewall. The following Figure shows a network deployment using PPPoE or PPPoA with NAT and a firewall. Configuring a Simple Firewall. Multiple networked devices,Desktops, laptop PCs, switches. Fast Ethernet LAN interface (the inside interface for NAT). PPPoE or PPPoA client and firewall implementation, Cisco 1811/1812 or Cisco 1801/1802/1803 series integrated services router, respectively. Point at which NAT occurs. Protected network. Unprotected network. Fast Ethernet or ATM WAN interface (the outside interface for NAT) Configuring a Simple Firewall In the configuration example that follows, the firewall is applied to the outside WAN interface (FE0) on the Cisco 1811 or Cisco 1812 and protects the Fast Ethernet LAN on FE2 by filtering and inspecting all traffic entering the router on the Fast Ethernet WAN interface FE1. Note that in this example, the network traffic originating from the trusted corporate network is considered safe traffic and is not filtered. Configuring a router-based firewall like this involves creating access lists to define which traffic is permitted or denied, configuring inspection rules for the protocols that need to be tracked, and then applying both the access lists and the inspection rules to the relevant network interfaces.

Firewall Limitations The importance of including a firewall in your security strategy is apparent; however, firewalls do have the following limitations: A firewall cannot prevent users or attackers with modems from dialing into or out of the internal network, thus bypassing the firewall and its protection completely. Firewalls cannot enforce your password policy or prevent misuse of passwords. Firewalls are ineffective against nontechnical security risks such as social engineering. Firewalls cannot stop internal users from accessing websites with malicious code, making user education critical. Firewalls cannot protect you from poor decisions. Firewalls cannot protect you when your security policy is too lax.